README.md, before:

# Volta: AI-Driven Cable Design Validation System

Volta is a sophisticated validation platform designed to ensure low-voltage cable designs comply with international engineering standards, specifically **IEC 60502-1** and **IEC 60228**. Leveraging **Firebase Genkit** and the **Gemma 3:1B** model, the system provides intelligent, reasoning-based validation for both structured technical inputs and natural language descriptions.

## System Overview

Volta is built as a production-ready, decoupled full-stack system. Unlike rigid rule-based engines, Volta utilizes a **grounded reasoning engine** where an AI model interprets design parameters against real-world technical standards provided as context.

### Key Capabilities

*   **Standards-Grounded Validation**: Real-time checking against IEC 60502-1 (Construction) and IEC 60228 (Conductors).
*   **Multi-Input Support**: Accept structured JSON, raw technical descriptions (Free-text), or fetch existing records by **Record ID**.
*   **AI Extraction Flow**: Intelligent parsing of natural language to extract core parameters (Voltage, Material, CSA, etc.) using Genkit Flows.
*   **Transparent Engineering Results**: Field-by-field PASS/WARN/FAIL status with technical justifications.
*   **Decision Support**: High-level AI reasoning summaries and confidence scoring for engineering review.
### System Flow

```mermaid
graph LR
    User([User]) -->|Input: JSON / Text / ID| UI[Next.js UI]
    UI -->|POST /design/validate| API[Validation Controller]
    
    subgraph Backend [NestJS Orchestrator]
        API --> Service[Validation Service]
        Service -->|Check ID| DB[(MongoDB)]
        Service -->|Input Processing| Logic{Precedence?}
    end

    subgraph Genkit [Genkit AI Flows]
        Logic -->|Free-Text| Extract[Extraction Flow]
        Logic -->|Structured| Validate[Validation Flow]
        Extract -->|Extracted Data| Validate
        Validate -->|Grounding| Standards[IEC Standards Context]
        Validate -->|Inference| LLM[Gemma 3]
    end

    Genkit -->|AI Results| Service
    Service -->|Response| UI
    UI -->|Display| Table[Results Table]
    UI -->|Open| Drawer[Reasoning Drawer]
```

### AI Engineering (Prompts)

The system utilizes two specialized Genkit Flows with dedicated prompt engineering:

#### 1. Extraction Flow
> Used for converting natural language descriptions into a structured technical schema.
```text
Extract cable design parameters from this technical text:
"${freeText}"

Fields to extract: standard, voltage, conductorMaterial, conductorClass, csa, insulationMaterial, insulationThickness.
CRITICAL: If a field is NOT mentioned, OMIT the key.
```

#### 2. Validation Flow
> Acting as an expert engineer to validate design against grounded IEC standards.
```text
System: You are an expert cable design engineer specializing in IEC 60502-1 and IEC 60228.
Prompt: Validate this cable design strictly against IEC standards:
${fields}

VALIDATION RULES:
1. IEC 60502-1 specifies nominal insulation thickness.
2. If provided value is significantly below nominal, it must be a FAIL.
```

### Validation Workflow

Volta follows a strict data precedence logic to ensure the most reliable source of information is used:

1.  **Record Retrieval (ID-based)**: If a `recordId` is provided, the system ignores other inputs and retrieves the "ground truth" design from MongoDB.
2.  **Field Extraction (AI-assisted)**: If `freeTextInput` is provided, the **Extraction Flow** uses AI to parse the natural language into a structured JSON schema.
3.  **Core Validation (Standards-Grounded)**: The final structured data is sent to the **Validation Flow**. This flow injects relevant **IEC 60502-1** and **IEC 60228** context into the prompt, allowing the AI to reason against actual standard requirements before returning the results.

## Architecture and Technology Stack

### Backend (NestJS)
*   **Orchestration**: NestJS with a modular service-based architecture.
*   **Data Persistence**: **MongoDB** (via Mongoose) for cable design records.
*   **AI Gateway**: **Firebase Genkit** providing type-safe AI flows and Zod-based contract enforcement.

### Frontend (Next.js)
*   **Framework**: Next.js 14 (App Router).
*   **Component Library**: Material UI (MUI v6) with a premium engineering aesthetic.
*   **Data Management**: MUI DataGrid for professional results management.

### AI Reasoning Engine
*   **Host**: Ollama (Local).
*   **Model**: Gemma 3:1B (815MB variant).
*   **Grounding**: Standards-based prompting for authoritative validation decisions.

## Project Structure

```text
Volta/
├── backend/            # NestJS Application
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── ai-gateway/     # Genkit flows, Zod schemas, and AI orchestration
│   │   ├── design-validation/ # Core domain logic and MongoDB schemas
│   │   └── main.ts         # Server entry point
│   ├── standards/      # Technical IEC standards used for AI grounding
├── frontend/           # Next.js Application
│   ├── app/            # App router pages and layouts
│   ├── components/     # Modular Material UI components (Input, Results, Drawer)
│   ├── services/       # Type-safe API communication layer
│   └── theme/          # Centralized MUI theme configuration
└── .Guides/             # Documentation, PRD, and Code Quality guidelines
```

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

*   **Node.js**: v18 or higher.
*   **MongoDB**: Local instance running on port 27017.
*   **Ollama**: Installed and running locally.

### AI Model Preparation

1.  Start the Ollama service.
2.  Install the validation model:
    ```bash
    ollama pull gemma3:1b
    ```

### Backend Installation

1.  Navigate to `/backend` and install dependencies:
    ```bash
    npm install
    ```
2.  Create a `.env` file based on `.env.example`:
    ```env
    PORT=3001
    OLLAMA_API_URL=http://localhost:11434
    OLLAMA_MODEL=gemma3:1b
    MONGODB_URI=mongodb://localhost:27017/volta
    ```
3.  Seed the database (Optional but recommended for testing):
    ```bash
    node seed-mongo.js
    ```
4.  Start the server:
    ```bash
    npm run start:dev
    ```

### Frontend Installation

1.  Navigate to `/frontend` and install dependencies:
    ```bash
    npm install
    ```
2.  Configure your local environment:
    ```bash
    echo "NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:3001" > .env.local
    ```
3.  Start the development application:
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

## Usage

1.  Visit `http://localhost:3000/design-validator`.
2.  **Input**: Enter parameters manually, paste a technical description, or use a provided ID (e.g., `cable-123`).
3.  **Validate**: Click "Validate Design" to trigger the Genkit validation flow.
4.  **Analyze**: View the results in the table and open the **AI Reasoning** drawer for detailed engineering justification.

## Disclaimer

This system is an AI-assisted validation tool. While it uses grounded technical standards for reasoning, validation results should be used as decision-support tools and do not replace professional engineering certification for safety-critical hardware.

Commit message:

docs: added the system flow architecture explanation

README.md, after:

# Volta: AI-Driven Cable Design Validation System

Volta is a sophisticated validation platform designed to ensure low-voltage cable designs comply with international engineering standards, specifically **IEC 60502-1** and **IEC 60228**. Leveraging **Firebase Genkit** and the **Gemma 3:1B** model, the system provides intelligent, reasoning-based validation for both structured technical inputs and natural language descriptions.

## System Overview

Volta is built as a production-ready, decoupled full-stack system. Unlike rigid rule-based engines, Volta utilizes a **grounded reasoning engine** where an AI model interprets design parameters against real-world technical standards provided as context.

### Key Capabilities

*   **Standards-Grounded Validation**: Real-time checking against IEC 60502-1 (Construction) and IEC 60228 (Conductors).
*   **Multi-Input Support**: Accept structured JSON, raw technical descriptions (Free-text), or fetch existing records by **Record ID**.
*   **AI Extraction Flow**: Intelligent parsing of natural language to extract core parameters (Voltage, Material, CSA, etc.) using Genkit Flows.
*   **Transparent Engineering Results**: Field-by-field PASS/WARN/FAIL status with technical justifications.
*   **Decision Support**: High-level AI reasoning summaries and confidence scoring for engineering review.
### System Flow

```mermaid
graph LR
    User([User]) -->|Input: JSON / Text / ID| UI[Next.js UI]
    UI -->|POST /design/validate| API[Validation Controller]
    
    subgraph Backend [NestJS Orchestrator]
        API --> Service[Validation Service]
        Service -->|Check ID| DB[(MongoDB)]
        Service -->|Input Processing| Logic{Precedence?}
    end

    subgraph Genkit [Genkit AI Flows]
        Logic -->|Free-Text| Extract[Extraction Flow]
        Logic -->|Structured| Validate[Validation Flow]
        Extract -->|Extracted Data| Validate
        Validate -->|Grounding| Standards[IEC Standards Context]
        Validate -->|Inference| LLM[Gemma 3]
    end

    Genkit -->|AI Results| Service
    Service -->|Response| UI
    UI -->|Display| Table[Results Table]
    UI -->|Open| Drawer[Reasoning Drawer]
```

### Technical Flow Breakdown

The Volta validation engine operates through a multi-stage pipeline designed for precision and transparency:

1.  **Ingestion Phase**: The Next.js frontend captures technical data via structured forms or raw text. This is transmitted to the NestJS backend via a type-safe POST request.
2.  **Orchestration Phase**: The `DesignValidationService` acts as the brain. It checks for a `recordId` to fetch historical data from MongoDB. If free-text is present, it prioritizes extraction.
3.  **AI Extraction (Genkit)**: The **Extraction Flow** uses Zod schemas to force the LLM to output a clean JSON object from messy technical descriptions.
4.  **Standards Grounding**: Before validation, the system reads markdown-based IEC standards from the `/standards` directory. This context is injected into the AI's system prompt, ensuring the model's "reasoning" is grounded in actual engineering requirements rather than general knowledge.
5.  **Validation & Reasoning**: The **Validation Flow** executes on Gemma 3. It performs a field-by-field audit, generating specific comments and an overall confidence score based on how well the design matches the grounded standards.
6.  **Presentation Phase**: The final payload is mapped to a professional DataGrid, with a dedicated sidebar for engineers to inspect the AI's underlying logic.

### AI Engineering (Prompts)

The system utilizes two specialized Genkit Flows with dedicated prompt engineering:

#### 1. Extraction Flow
> Used for converting natural language descriptions into a structured technical schema.
```text
Extract cable design parameters from this technical text:
"${freeText}"

Fields to extract: standard, voltage, conductorMaterial, conductorClass, csa, insulationMaterial, insulationThickness.
CRITICAL: If a field is NOT mentioned, OMIT the key.
```

#### 2. Validation Flow
> Acting as an expert engineer to validate design against grounded IEC standards.
```text
System: You are an expert cable design engineer specializing in IEC 60502-1 and IEC 60228.
Prompt: Validate this cable design strictly against IEC standards:
${fields}

VALIDATION RULES:
1. IEC 60502-1 specifies nominal insulation thickness.
2. If provided value is significantly below nominal, it must be a FAIL.
```

### Validation Workflow

Volta follows a strict data precedence logic to ensure the most reliable source of information is used:

1.  **Record Retrieval (ID-based)**: If a `recordId` is provided, the system ignores other inputs and retrieves the "ground truth" design from MongoDB.
2.  **Field Extraction (AI-assisted)**: If `freeTextInput` is provided, the **Extraction Flow** uses AI to parse the natural language into a structured JSON schema.
3.  **Core Validation (Standards-Grounded)**: The final structured data is sent to the **Validation Flow**. This flow injects relevant **IEC 60502-1** and **IEC 60228** context into the prompt, allowing the AI to reason against actual standard requirements before returning the results.

## Architecture and Technology Stack

### Backend (NestJS)
*   **Orchestration**: NestJS with a modular service-based architecture.
*   **Data Persistence**: **MongoDB** (via Mongoose) for cable design records.
*   **AI Gateway**: **Firebase Genkit** providing type-safe AI flows and Zod-based contract enforcement.

### Frontend (Next.js)
*   **Framework**: Next.js 14 (App Router).
*   **Component Library**: Material UI (MUI v6) with a premium engineering aesthetic.
*   **Data Management**: MUI DataGrid for professional results management.

### AI Reasoning Engine
*   **Host**: Ollama (Local).
*   **Model**: Gemma 3:1B (815MB variant).
*   **Grounding**: Standards-based prompting for authoritative validation decisions.

## Project Structure

```text
Volta/
├── backend/            # NestJS Application
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── ai-gateway/     # Genkit flows, Zod schemas, and AI orchestration
│   │   ├── design-validation/ # Core domain logic and MongoDB schemas
│   │   └── main.ts         # Server entry point
│   ├── standards/      # Technical IEC standards used for AI grounding
├── frontend/           # Next.js Application
│   ├── app/            # App router pages and layouts
│   ├── components/     # Modular Material UI components (Input, Results, Drawer)
│   ├── services/       # Type-safe API communication layer
│   └── theme/          # Centralized MUI theme configuration
└── .Guides/             # Documentation, PRD, and Code Quality guidelines
```

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

*   **Node.js**: v18 or higher.
*   **MongoDB**: Local instance running on port 27017.
*   **Ollama**: Installed and running locally.

### AI Model Preparation

1.  Start the Ollama service.
2.  Install the validation model:
    ```bash
    ollama pull gemma3:1b
    ```

### Backend Installation

1.  Navigate to `/backend` and install dependencies:
    ```bash
    npm install
    ```
2.  Create a `.env` file based on `.env.example`:
    ```env
    PORT=3001
    OLLAMA_API_URL=http://localhost:11434
    OLLAMA_MODEL=gemma3:1b
    MONGODB_URI=mongodb://localhost:27017/volta
    ```
3.  Seed the database (Optional but recommended for testing):
    ```bash
    node seed-mongo.js
    ```
4.  Start the server:
    ```bash
    npm run start:dev
    ```

### Frontend Installation

1.  Navigate to `/frontend` and install dependencies:
    ```bash
    npm install
    ```
2.  Configure your local environment:
    ```bash
    echo "NEXT_PUBLIC_API_URL=http://localhost:3001" > .env.local
    ```
3.  Start the development application:
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

## Usage

1.  Visit `http://localhost:3000/design-validator`.
2.  **Input**: Enter parameters manually, paste a technical description, or use a provided ID (e.g., `cable-123`).
3.  **Validate**: Click "Validate Design" to trigger the Genkit validation flow.
4.  **Analyze**: View the results in the table and open the **AI Reasoning** drawer for detailed engineering justification.

## Disclaimer

This system is an AI-assisted validation tool. While it uses grounded technical standards for reasoning, validation results should be used as decision-support tools and do not replace professional engineering certification for safety-critical hardware.
